>> So welcome to session 103 getting started with Core Data.
I am Melissa Turner I am one of the engineers who
work on Core Data and they drafted me to come up here
and tell you all about all the wonderful stuff I do.
Now if I had to make a guess, I'd guess
that a lot of you have something in common.
A lot of you are probably programmers or the
unfortunate few that have to manage programmers
and get us all going in the same direction.
So I'm going to show you some applications and then
we're going to talk about what they have in common.
Some of you are pretty familiar or might be familiar with
this application, its Yojimbo by Bare Bones software.
It's a personal organizer application.
Let's use track and store notes, archives
of web pages, few other interesting things.
This is iCal, many of you are probably
familiar with it, we shipped it on Tiger.
Some partially rewritten for Leopard, it does some new and
interesting things and we'll get into those later as well.
Most of you probably haven't seen this, this is
Terrain editor, it's an application developed by one
of our customers, it's an OpenGL application that lets
you navigate and sort of fly through rendered landscape.
And this is Aperture, Apple's latest
edition to our stable of Pro applications.
What do all these applications have in common?
Well starting with the obvious,
they are all Cocoa applications.
All of them deal with data, they create
it, they store it, they retrieve it
and while that data is live, they manage it.
They track undo, redo, that kind of thing.
And all of them use Core Data.
Hwy do they use Core Data and this is sort of the
part you are really here for the why's, the how's.
You want to know how we can make your life
better and what motivated our customers,
the ones we've got started using Core Data.
Well they wanted to spend time working on their features,
when it comes right down to it they
didn't want to reinvent wheels.
Persistence is really critically important but not
what anyone buys an application for, they don't go
and say oh wow you store your data
as, at least more people don't.
Most people say this is a really
cool accounting application.
This is a really cool game.
They're interested in the features
that they can see and manipulate.
Persistence isn't really on their radar.
So something that is very easy for programmers to
hand off to a framework and let somebody else do it.
Object lifecycle management is
the same kind of thing, undo redo.
People notice when it's there but they don't particularly
care how it got there or how it's implemented.
So these are things that are really ideal to hand
off to somebody else who is willing to write them
so you can concentrate on building the
really interesting user interactions
that make your application something your customers
are really going to want to go out and buy.
And the additional benefit of using somebody else's
framework is that well you get automatic access
to everything they do and if your using an Apple framework
that means you get automatic access
to all the platform initiatives.
If for example Apple goes off and I know they'd never
do this but if they decided to switch chip architectures
and say go from something that was big endian to
little endian, you wouldn't have to do anything
because the underlying technology
takes care of that for you.
So it's less work you have to do on stuff that
is not terribly interesting to your customers.
It gives you more time to spend doing
whatever it is that you do best.
So today we are going through some of the basics
supported, what the pieces are, how they fit together.
We're going to talk about building models cause models
are essentially the scaffolding around which all
of Core Data sort of operates or
within all which Core Date operates.
We're going to visit some applications and stuff and we
are going to visit some applications that use Core Data
and sort of talk about how they are using it,
why they are using it, what they got out of it
and it might give you some ideas
for things you hadn't thought about.
Either application you hadn't thought about building in
Core Data or things that you hadn't thought about putting
in your application that are kind of neat and nifty.
We'll talk about Core Data features and a little
bit more depth, some of the things you can do sort
of what the features you can expect is and we'll go through
some of the common questions that people come up with
when there first starting to look at using Core Data.
So the pieces, what are they?
How do they fit together?
Well most people start looking at Core Data because
they want a persistence layer and well it's got data
in the name so maybe that's what it does.
So the foundation, the lowest level of Core Data is the
persistence stores, these are the pieces of technology
that take care of putting bits on a disc and pulling bits
off a disc and putting them into some clarinet form for you.
We provide four stores under the box and SQLite
and XML and in memory and the binary store.
These all have different characteristics, it's up to you
to pick the one that works best for your application.
We've tried to give you good enough selection
that there's something out there for everyone.
But incase whatever we, the stores we have aren't quite
what you need, you maybe need to support a legacy format.
We also pride in Leopard and API that allow
you to build a custom Core Data Store,
first class store just like all the others only
its your data format doing what you need it to do.
But as I said we're pushing bits in and out of a file.
Something needs to define a structure for those
bits to say you know this piece of it is a date.
This piece of it is the strength.
That's done by the managed object model, the
models sort of defines the structure of your date.
It says these are the pieces and this
is how they interact with each other.
The main components in managed object models are entities.
Entities have attributes, strings, dates, numbers and
they have relationships which are as you might guess,
relationships that describe interactions between entities.
The objects that are created from the design that
is the managed object model called managed objects.
These are instances of the entities and
these are the sort of real work horses,
these are the things that hold your data.
In a sense they are the nouns of Core Data,
the songs, the people, the presentations,
these are the things you operate on, you
work with, this is the important stuff.
But a model and a managed object really isn't sufficient,
you need some kind of connection between the two of them
so that your application can make use
of the information that's in the model.
In Core Data this position is filled
by the managed object context.
It's sort of the central scrutinizer of Core Data.
It watch's all of the managed objects that are
registered with it, takes notes whenever a change is made
and records information so that undo and redo just work.
It also takes care of maintaining
relationships, if something changes on one end
of a relationship it will go off and do
whatever's necessary to update the other end of it.
All of this for free, you don't have to worry about it.
And in between the stores and the managed object
context because those are the top and bottom levels
of the Core Data stack lives a
persistence store coordinator.
This is sort of the center of the Core Data world,
the fulcrum point around which every thing else spins.
This is where we register the managed
object models, so if you ever need to get
to your model you go to persistence store coordinator.
It mediates between the context and the stores so that
the stores don't need to know whose using their data,
all they know is that the coordinator
has asked them for some.
In context don't need to know where data is coming from.
All they need to know if they can ask the
coordinator and they will take care of it for them.
This is a very important piece of the stack,
you probably not have to interact with it much,
you need to register the model and this
is where you add and remove stores.
But most of the rest of your interactions
are probably going to be
with the managed objects and the managed object context.
So how does it all fit together?
Well sort of like this, on the one
end you have the persistence stores.
On the other end you have the managed object context.
Your user comes in at the managed context level and
says I want to look at all songs in my song library,
the context say okay we can do that and it passes
the request down to the persistence store coordinator
which goes off and hands it to
a store and says get me songs.
The store goes off and retrieves everything that
matches the description songs and passes it all up back
to context which returns those to the user.
So that's where all the components are
attached to each other, that's how they fit
and that whole fetch concept is encapsulated
in another object called the fetch request.
A fetch request describes the data you are interested in
retrieving from the store, specifies what entity you want
and it can specify filtering and sorting
rules as well so you can say not,
I don't just want songs, I want all Pink Floyd songs.
And that's done with a fetch request.
And we have some features on fetch request that will
allow you to find tune how you get your data back.
We have a head start example that you can have a look at,
see some of the parameters that are tweaked and Adam Smith
and the session immediately after this one
in this room will be talking more in depth
about fetch request and how to tune them.
So at this point I am going to bring Ben up for a demo and
he is going to show you, now that I showed you the picture
of how Core Data fits together, he's going
to show you what it look like in code.
>> Ben: Good Morning I'm Ben Trumbull.
I am the manager of the Core Data team and I'm
going to show you a fairly simple foundation tool.
So one of the questions we have is a lot of our demo's
and work, work with Cocoa bindings and Interface Builder,
you see a lot of examples with sort of dynamic
UI and stuff like that and I just wanted
to show you something that's fairly
straight forward, a little app.
So it's just a page of code and you
can see some warnings there, my code.
And we have a fairly simple model for this app here
which basically goes off and every time you run it,
it records the process ID and the time stamp in
a launch entity.
So here I just imported Core Data
header and we set up a Core Data stack
and the basic stack is set up with just these two methods.
We create model, in this case we initialize it with
a contents of the URL for the model we created in the tool
and we create a coordinator and we register the model
with it and then we add a store and I've just got a URL
to a little XML file that's in the current working
directory and we clear the context which is alloc inited.
We set the coordinator, now the store
is empty when we first run this app.
So we want to create a new instance of
our launch entity here, which we do.
Asking entity description to create a
new one and then we ask NS process info
which is a foundation to get the current process identifier.
We wrap it in a number object and then here we
tell the record we created to set this attribute.
Now I am getting a warning because
actually didn't declare any new classes.
As you can see the total work here is
I'm linked against two frameworks.
Xcode decided to give me like a man page and
some other things that I am not sure I really needed.
I have the model and I have my dot M. so what's going
on here is in Leopard, Core Data is automatically going
to generate accessor methods for anything you
need for the entity that you are working with.
So the launch entity has a PID attribute and
the launch entity also has a time attribute.
So we can set and get these properties even
though we actually haven't made a class for them
because at run time Core Data will specialize the class of
the object that we are working with to match the entity.
So I do the same thing here, I ask NS date to
give me a date, then tell managed object context,
I'd like to save the changes I've made with this newly
inserted record and then the app basically goes off
and creates this fetch request
that Melissa was telling you about.
I tell it that I am going to fetch launch entities and
then I don't send anything else because I am just going
to grab all of them, all the ones that have been saved.
I ask the context to execute the fetch and then I just log
and I call value for key on the array to get all the PIDs.
So basically I have a model and I have
the compiled program here.
And if I run the tool it just logs the PID and we
can see that we created and XML file here as the type
of store we created and we got a little XML
file, there's some metadata at the beginning.
The Core Data is using to track information, you know
what version of the launch entity I was working with
and then here we can see the object,
the PID and the time stamp.
And then if I run it a few times
you can see they just accumulate.
So this is basically, this is probably the
simplest Core Data app you are going to write.
And it's broken up into just a few pieces where you
set up the stack, you add a store, you create a context
and then you start working with your managed objects.
I do most.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: So Ben talked, I talked to you
earlier about models and Ben talked about models.
It's really hard to over estimate how
important these are to your application.
The first is sort of high level view, what is a model?
Models a blueprint of your data,
it describes what it looks like.
In a more traditional world you
might think of it as a schema
but that really applies to the external representation.
Models sort of the description of the Y
versions of your objects and how they interact.
A good way to think of it is in the context of Objective-C.
a class is to an object as an entity is to a managed object
and a model encapsulates a whole bunch of
entities and describes how they interact.
So the second most important part of your application,
most important part of course being the idea, the spark,
the thing that is your trying to communicate.
It's influenced by and will influence your
interface as you start thinking about modeling
and as you start learning it, you
sort of start seeing how it might.
How your application might be faster or more elegant if you
built it this way but the model will also designed by sort
of how you want to present, be influenced by
how you want opt present you data to the user.
There's a few simple principles to follow when you're
building a model and we're going to go watch for an example
that will sort of help you see how it
works and see those principles at play.
We're going to go with the songs example because well
it's interesting and that's what I have slides for.
But when you're talking about building an application, a
song library type of applications maybe call it my tunes,
you get a bunch of pieces of data you need to organize.
Here's some of them, just a few random
ones that are the most obvious things
that you might think of when you're talking about songs.
So you've got these things, you
need to play with them somehow.
You need to conglomerate them together so
you can operate on and manipulate with them.
So how do you do that?
Where do you start?
Well at first pass might be something that looks like this.
You just stick everything into one big table.
Each song has all of the information
associated with the song in a single row.
Well it's not bad for first pass but it's not
the most efficient thing we can do either.
If you look at it you'll notice
that there's duplicated data.
This is always I mean it increases
the size of your application.
You got extra strings all over the
place, you got extra copies of data
and it makes it a little bit more difficult to maintain.
Its not as visible in this song type application
but if you envision a contact dictionary,
if you change a name in one place you often want those
changes propagated else where and if you put the information
in just one place you'll only have to edit it in
one place and everything else relates off to it.
So we've got album information and if I edit it in one
row I'll probably going to want it edited everywhere.
So whey don't we split that off into a separate table.
Take all of this row and move it
somewhere else, often to its album table.
Well for those of you that are familiar with
normalization and doing relational modeling
in databases your probably saying oh yeah now she's
going to tell me I have to add a row ID column
and add foreign keys back to the other
table, no you don't need to do any of that.
Core Data takes care of all this for you, all of the key
management taken, you can just concentrate on your data.
The Row ID just goes away, so there's your album table.
So we had that row and we made it gone.
Following the principle of eliminating
redundant data we see that well we've got
yet more information sitting there duplicated.
Things that really are the same piece of information
just in multiple places, so we'll take that row away too,
but wait a second do I want to just make that a single to
one relationship cause you know the way this is recorded,
in some places I might have multiple artist for the
same song and that make searching kind of a painful.
One or the other artist is likely to get lost in the library
and last we give each of those artist there own entry
and link both of those back to the original table.
This is what's called a (inaudible) relationship.
So there goes that row, what else can we do?
How can we make this smaller?
Well here's some more duplicated data,
that's what we are working with isn't it?
But when you really think about it our song title, wish
you were here, is that the same thing in both cases.
I mean if I am talking about an album Delicate
Sound of Thunder by a group Pink Floyd,
those are really unique identifying
pieces of information for those objects.
Song titles really aren't unique in the same way.
There basically key information about the song itself
but the same key information can
be shared across multiple songs.
If I edit one, I only want to edit that one not all of them.
So think we can leave those in place.
So what else have we got done?
We've got this column sitting over here song data, now this
is an interesting case and this is where we start getting
into the art and science of model design.
If you think about your application my tunes, how
are you going to present information to the user?
You probably are going to have some kind of
a table view listing you know song titles,
lengths, ratings, that kind of stuff.
And that's what the user sees so really that's all the data
we really need to load in order to show them the interface.
We don't actually need to load the song
data because well it's big and it takes time
to pull stuff off disc and they are not going to use it.
So we don't really need that song data sitting right
there in to that row, we can just move that off
into a song table file and leave the sings table to
show only the information that's going to be right there
in the interface when your user goes looking for it.
Systems and basic split out of the model sort
of conceptually how it works and what it does,
so now I am going to go through and show you
how to do this in the Xcode modeling tool.
Whoops.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: Where is my project, where is my project?
There we go.
So here we have a sort of vestigial model, shows all the
table that I broke out as we walked thought that example.
We got song data, bytes, we got artist
with group or with name and whether a group
or not, we got albums with labels and names.
And how did they get the model it was actually
pretty simple, you just go up to Xcode, new file,
scroll down and we have under the
design category data models.
But I've already created this one and cause its
boring for you guys to watch models on stage.
So just going to add a songs entity since
that is truly the center of the world.
And I am going to add some attributes.
Its going to be done either using the contacts menu
or by coming up here, clicking on this little arrow
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: Give it a title, give it a rating.
>> Melissa: Okay so its morning and that
means that I am not allowed to type.
You can come up here to the inspector view and give all
of these types, last plate is going to be a date, blank,
well let's make that a decimal,
rating is going to be an integer.
Untitled is going to se a string.
So there we have our basic song information but no
connections to anything else that is actually related.
So add some relationships while we're at it.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: And again we can come up to this corner
of the model editor and set up a relationships,
we can edit the friends names here and we set the
destinations of the relationship, in this case is album
and immediately below that we have a pop up list
for inverses and this is actually kind of important
because it allows Core Data to figure out what
the other half of any other given relationship is.
Because when you think about it when you got a
relationship it's really bi directional, songs have albums
and albums have songs, if I change something about one,
if I added a new song to an album I also want the son
to know that it now belongs to that album.
So by setting up two relationships is inverses,
your really saying this is really the same
relationship seen from two differing directions.
And that lets Core Data do all the
relationship maintenance for you.
So we're going to go through and songs belong to albums,
but album can have multiple songs
so we will mark that as a it's many.
Set up the artist relationship.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Songs can have multiple artists.
Artists definitely have multiple songs most of the times.
And we'll also set up the song have been to everything.
And we'll also set up the song, data relationship.
But that's one long because any song really
only has only one pierce of information.
That's our model, pretty simple.
But wait there's more once I've got
the model I can just go into build,
interface builder and build a little interface for it.
Where's my window?
I scroll through my library of interesting
stuff and I grab the Core Data entity element.
And I am just going to drag that out and interface
builder is going to notice that I am trying to set
up an application, an interface for Core Data entity.
What does it know about Core Data entities?
Well it knows it's got a model, it's got a
project open, project has a model so maybe I want
to use one of those and indeed its correct, I do.
I am going to set this up so I can display multiple
instance of my song, add some separate widgets
so you can see the changes I am
making in this view over here.
This is what is going to end up looking like.
And I am going to select the elements
that I want to display.
This is going to be an inspector window so I don't
need any of the stuff that's in a relationship.
There we go, I have an interface.
I am going to arrange it for a second
because I like having titles up top.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: And let's go and edit the table
a little bit and move the title over here.
But there, that looks like it's not a bad
first pass at building a little song inspector.
So what next, well to files those,
oops I missed something in my model.
If I go through and look at all of these, it's important
to Core Data that I specify types for all of my data
because this allows it to say when you pull these
bytes off discs turn it into an object of this type.
Well we notice over in this column here
that some of my things are undefined.
Well I should probably go through and give those
a definition so I can collect multiple ones.
We do multi select so it's easier to edit
multiple attributes at the same time.
What else did I miss?
Missed the artist songs relationship,
I did not give it indeed correct.
Somehow I deleted that relationship
so there we should be all done.
We should just be able to build it and at this point
I got my fingers crossed cause I haven't run it
on this system before so we'll see if it works.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: There we go.
>> Melissa: Just add a couple of songs here.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: We can just, oh I forgot
to set up a save method.
Oh well. Its morning, I'm slow.
I could come in here and tell it, actually that's
not correct, it automatically set it up for me,
so if I quit the application and
rerun it, there we got our data.
It's the same thing I entered before, not a line
of code required, well that you wrote anyway.
This is just one of the standard template applications,
if you want to see how a basic Core Data application,
a little bit more complicated then the one Ben
setup, one that has a user interface looks.
You just go into Xcode and create
a new project Core Data application.
We got a few types.
Document based and document based
for the Spotlight importer.
It's a way to get you started.
I have a drink somewhere.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Melissa: So can we go back to the sides please?
So that's sort of the how to get started on modeling,
its very easy, we provide integration from between Xcode
and interface builder and Core Data so that 9its really
to bring up a simple application, get things started
and start playing with your data and
figuring out what you want it to look like?
That was a basic model, we also support version
models, which is a way of telling Core Data
and that different models are really
different generations of the same thing.
Miguel will be talking more about that in his session
at I believe 2 o'clock today, also in this room
and he'll also be discussing schema migration, which is how
to translate data that was written to disc in one format,
into a different format, so later
version of your application can read it.
So that's according to basics, modeling basics.
Now we are going to look at some of the applications that
are using Core Data and sort of see what they are doing
with it and what they are to give you a since how
broad the scope of what Core Data can help you with is,
first off is your system events, well system events, well
technically its Cocoa application but really what it is,
is a demon that runs on your system so sure it lives in
the background and waits for people to send Apple events
to it, it's AppleScript integrated. That's the API.
Background process just sits there and waits
for people to send a request, send, create data,
pull data out from the system of events server database.
It's very generic, they create models on the fly,
they pull data out and return it as generic objects,
through the magic of key value
coding it all again just works.
It's very flexible and very powerful, it doesn't have
a defined schema, but it allows people to do useful
and interesting things, without a lot of work.
Yojimbo, you saw this earlier, it's a personal organizer
written by the folks over at Bare Bones and it's a bunch
of types of data and the important
thing with Yojimbo is it has to scale.
It has the potential to have Gigabytes
and gigabytes of data in your data store.
They need a technology that was capable of doing
that and Core Data is, they use or SQLite store,
everything is goes out into the same file, gets
brought in, very fast, for a snappy application.
iCal as I mentioned was rewritten for Leopard, they wanted
to take advances of Core Data because they were starting
to want increased skill ability and they wanted
to be able to store more of that, more people,
more interesting things hanging off of that.
It's also a framework in Leopard it's the iCal framework
so that other applications are integrated in integration
with the information in iCal have an API that they can
use to call into it and retrieve information about events.
You see this in Mail where the to
do's are shared between iCal and Mail.
So they needed multi process access, which Core Data could
give them, and they desperately wanted change tracking
so that if you undid, or if you made a bunch of
changes to an event and the suddenly realized oops,
I'm editing the wrong event, not that
I personally would ever have done that,
you can just undo back across all of those changes.
And even if there's been a save
because iCal saves automatically
for you quite frequently, you can undo back across saves.
Core Data does all of that.
Address book.
Again address book has been rewritten
in Leopard to use Core Data.
Again, they are after increased capability, scalability.
They had a slightly different set of requirements,
because where iCal was for the first time publishing
their framework APIs, Address Book already had a set
of framework APIs that they needed to remain binary
compatible with.
And they've successfully done that using Core Data.
And one of the other requirements is that
legacy API that they needed to support needed
to support multi threaded access, needed to be able to
pass address book objects to people, contacts, groups,
they needed to be able to pass that around between threads.
And they're successfully doing
that using Core Data in Leopard
Xcode, in the spirit of eating your own dog food,
also uses Core Data, in a couple of places, actually.
We use it in the modeling editor
that you saw earlier and we use it
in the documentation viewer, which
you might not have expected.
Documentation viewer has multiple data
sources, they have multiple persistent stores.
Each section of documentation, the Carbon stuff,
the Java stuff, the Cocoa stuff, is its own file.
And they present a unified interface on top of that so it
looks like all of the data is coming from a single place.
They get hundreds of thousands of symbols that they
need to be able to manage and they need to be able
to complex text queries on a return
results very, very quickly.
They actually have a hybrid storage model.
Well all of the meta information, all of the symbol
information is actually st0ored in Core Data.
The bulky files, they actually store outside on the
file system because file systems are really great
at storing large elements of infrequently
accessed data that you don't need to search on.
And as with the rest of Xcode is 64-bit garbage collected.
Terrain Editor, we showed you that one earlier.
It's actually an OpenGL application
that does real time rendering
and allows you to navigate through a virtual landscape.
In this case we have a picture of Britain
that was downloaded from some information
that was retrieved from the British government, I believe.
All of the data, all of the vertices that are used
to construct these scenes are stored in Core Data.
The author just stores them as data attributes and passes
those data blobs directly into the OpenGL rendering engine.
His requirement was really it had to be low latency.
Rendering engines and the people
who use them are very, very fussy.
They don't want to have to sit around
and wait and have one scene per second
as your application slowly pulls data out of a database.
They need it to be very, very fast, they need it to be very,
very seamless and Core Data is capable of giving him that.
And also it gave him undo, redo, binding support, a bunch
of stuff that he didn't want to have to write himself.
And there's other apps on the system
that use Core Data as well
and other applications out in the world that use Core Data.
Some of the other benefits, some of the other
reasons people like it, it enables rapid development.
You say how quickly I brought up a simple
little inspector type application in Core Data.
Very, very fast and flexible.
It allows you to get it started with minimal code and time.
It lets you concentrate on your features.
And at least one of the applications we have out there, Icon
Composer, has a custom Core Data store that they're using
that actually writes the traditional .ICNS files.
So just because you're not using what you think
of as a standard database type application doesn't mean
there's not a way that Core Data might be able to help you.
And I'm going to haul Ben back on stage and he's
going to go into some detail on Core Data features.
>> Thank you, Melissa.
So I'm going to give you an overview of some
of the features that Core Data is providing.
We're not going to go into too deep a detail, but
just kind of raise your awareness of things about some
of the things you can expect from Core Data.
So in particular, one of the higher level
parts of Core Data, there are two main pieces,
there's the persistence mechanism, which is fairly
self explanatory and then the data management,
and this is broken up into change
tracking, relationship management and undo.
So for the change tracking, the manage object context
is tracking all the insertions, updates, deletes,
whenever you changing your managed objects, it's
recording that and keeping track of what's changed.
It's posting notifications for you, so the managed
objects themselves are all key value observing compliant
and the managed object context at
the end of every event will batch up
and send a meta notification of what changed recently.
And with the SQL store, it's providing incremental saves,
so it'll only save the objects that have actually changed.
For the relationship maintenance, there are a number
of pieces, and the first is unique references.
So in the songs, for example, that Melissa showed
you, if you fetch multiple songs and they're all
from the same artist, when you
traverse the relationship there,
you're going to get back the same
artist object for each of those songs.
So Core Data is going to make sure that you have a single
unique object for all the artists working with those songs.
And as Melissa mentioned, Core Data is maintaining
the inverses, so if you decide that you made a mistake
in your editing, and a song has a different artist,
it'll fix up the other end of the relationship for you.
And if you start deleting artists, it'll follow the
relationships and it'll clear things out for you.
Or in your model, you can specify that you
want it to cascade and remove a whole chain
of objects and then finally the undo support.
This is something that really helps a lot of
developers out because it's very easy to do.
You wire it up and your done.
And bindings, in the App delegate.
So there's no real configuration on your part.
It's all based on the model.
The manage object context is just rolling back changes
to the state of affairs that existed the previous event.
And it works across saves.
This is something a lot of developers really like.
But there's not much really to say about it.
There's not much that you need to do about it.
And as I mentioned there's the persistence mechanism,
which for the most part is pretty self explanatory.
We've got four main stores, the XML Store, which is
using NS XML from foundation, the binary store,
which is using a keyed archive reference foundation,
the SQLite store, which is using SQLite library,
and then a custom store, an atomic store,
this is the store that you might write.
And then the persistent store coordinator
is working with aggregation.
So if you do a fetch, we'll find out which stores
actually have those objects and give them back to you.
And if you do save, will remember where those objects
came from and save updates back to the originating store.
And then in Leopard, we support versioning, so we keep track
of which entities were used to create the store and whether
or not you load a store later, perhaps after
one of your customers has done an upgrade,
if that store's still compatible with your current version.
And we have some tools to do schema
changes to migrate to your next version.
And as Melissa mentioned iCal, Address Book and some
of our other clients are using multiprocessing.
So the SQLite store offers incremental changes and it
does file system locking and it supports multiple readers
and authors and the conflicts are handled by the context.
So we'll talk about that right now.
So we'll detect changes made to the same objects in the data
file, whether by multiple threads or by multiple processes.
And we have automated recovery options for you.
And these are called the merge policies.
And if you decide you want to learn more about what exactly
is going on, Wikipedia has Optimistic Concurrency Control.
But for the most part, on the context you just set what kind
of recovery option you want and
Core Data will handle if for you.
And as mentioned, we provide a lot
of the platform initiatives here.
So we're integrated into Cocoa and we support
key value coding on all the managed objects.
As I demonstrated earlier, we'll
even generate the methods for you
to match all the accessors that
your entities might want to define.
And everything's key value observing compliant, so
you can get notifications whenever a property changes.
We have the undo feature.
And Core Data is built on top of
the NS undo manager from foundation.
So if you want to customize our undo behavior,
you have all the foundation API to do that.
And the same is true with the notifications.
We're just working with the NS notification center
and you have all the foundation API
there to customize that behavior.
And we're integrated on the other side, sort
of the at Kit Cocoa side, with Cocoa bindings.
And in the tools integration side, we
have all these modeling tools for you.
We have the templates that both Melissa's
app and my app were based off of.
So there are a number of other templates for
you to explore to get you started faster.
We're integrated with Cocoa bindings, an interface builder.
And we have wizards.
So in addition to the wizard showed you,
there's a wizard for the collection view,
to do a grid layout, and a bunch of other things.
And finally in Leopard we have some
integration with Xray and we have built
in probes to track performance issues for you.
And high level Mac OS X initiatives.
We're fully 32-bit and 64-bit compliant.
So you can just get started with your 64-bit efforts.
If you have the, obviously universal binaries.
We're supporting the new Objective-C properties,
so in Objective-C 2 with both dynamic
properties and garbage collection.
And we also spend some effort on multi core utilization.
So a lot of people's machines, most of the shipping
systems here are dual or quad core or even 8 core
and Core Data is finding some ways to use those up for you.
And something important to keep in mind
here, we get a lot of questions about this,
Core Data is not an ideal solution
if you can't link against foundation.
We're integrated into all the Cocoa
technologies and if you can't use foundation
for some reason then Core Data
isn't a great solution for you.
We also have, we want that model information.
All of these automatic behaviors
are derived from your schema.
So if you have an application in which the user
can change any aspect of the schema all the time,
then Core Data isn't really a great
solution because there's some overhead
and we want to compile the model
and have it relatively static.
So you can make changes to the
model, but we're going to want you
to reload the data after you do that and stuff like that.
So if you need to make changes all the time,
Core Data's not a perfect solution for you.
And then finally, if it's not a client server database,
all of the persistence technologies are backed by files
and we currently don't have any plans
for client server support at this time.
So some other common questions that are coming up
have to do with performance, so here's a little sample
that I wrote several different versions of this
project and it fetches 500,000 rows in SQLite store.
They're all using the same store.
And the purple column, the SQLite store,
is pretty typical of the kind of code
when I see people using SQLite directly themselves.
The model objects here are NS dictionaries, so they
have NS dictionaries in a table view, for instance,
and they're working with SQLite to pull back the rows
and they set all of the columns as keys in the dictionary
and the column values as those values in the dictionary.
Now if you refine that and you
have a custom object and you run it
through Shark a lot, you can get
it to be quite a bit faster.
So that's what the optimize SQLite column there is in blue.
And both of these are raw C tools.
There's actually very little.
So the dictionaries here are CF dictionaries.
So there isn't any overhead here in terms of
language initiatives or anything like that.
These are C programs.
The optimize SQLite does a lot of work to, for
instance, optimize retain counting and a bunch
of other issues if you're working with core foundation.
And then finally we get to Core Data, which is again about
twice as fast as the previous optimizing as SQLite yourself.
And the reason for that comes up with the
multi core utilization that we're doing.
So this fetches large enough that we
realize hey, we've got some extra cores
in the machine, we can do something useful with them.
And as a point of reference, I wrote a tool that
malloc'd the same amount of memory and then freed it.
So we're about twice the speed of just mallocing that
memory and then releasing it as a bench point here.
And we're going to get into this example a little bit
more in the next session talking about optimization.
So the basic speed is pretty fast.
We're smaller and faster than dictionaries.
Dictionaries are very flexible.
There are arbitrary hash tables there.
And the Core Data is making use of that schema information
and providing a much more optimized
layout and much faster look ups.
The dynamic methods we generate are direct
dispatches, so it's very synonymous to ivar access.
And we're providing configurable options on the
fetch request for your applications specific needs.
And there's an entire example devoted to
exploring this attached to the next session,
session 105, Optimizing Your Core Data Application.
So you can take a look at that.
And even if you're new to Cocoa, you can run the
app and get an idea of what the little options are
and how they change the behavior of the application.
So some common questions we have in terms
of customers improving their performance,
something that often goes overlooked is fetching
performs IO, so if you're working with the SQLite store
in particular, we're going to be
loading that data as you ask for it.
So every time you ask for new data, we
have to go to disk and that's kind of slow.
So you don't want to have to do that for every single object.
What you're rather do is have one fetch that says hey,
I'm going to need all these objects really
soon now, can you go off and get them for me?
So it's much, much faster to issue a fetch
that's for an entire batch of objects.
And if your batch is large enough, then
we might decide that we can actually spool
up some background threads to help
you get that done even faster.
Since this is IO, you really want to be reading from
the database the same way you would from a file.
You're not going to be reading a single character
out of unbuffered file one character at a time.
You're going to read a bunch in the buffer
and then you're going to work with them
and then you're going to read the next batch.
And that's really the best way to work with
Core Data an any of the options we provide.
There are also a bunch of performance
tools here that tend to go overlooked.
So new on Leopard, we have Xray and DTrace, but I want to
bring your attention to Shark, which can be loved more.
So there's an all thread state option in the time sampling
with Shark that'll track how long it took to get data
from disk, which is obviously a big
issue for working with a lot of data.
And then finally Core Data itself offers some SQL logging.
There's a user default and we'll just log what
we're sending to the database and give you an idea
of how often we're going to the database.
It includes timing information,
annotations and stuff like that.
Another common question that comes
up is how to create unique values.
So how to assure that there's only one
artist of a given name in the database.
And it turns out that this kind of behavior is a little
bit intentioned with Core Data providing unique references.
Because if you make a mistake, and you said
no, these two things were the same at run time
and we've already created two unique
references, resolving that is somewhat difficult.
So one of the key things to remember is to avoid
fetching each of these objects one at a time.
So if you're creating a unique artist, you don't
want to every time the user enters a new artist,
you kind of want to avoid fetching is this
artist unique, is this artist unique,
is this artist unique, is this artist unique.
If you can, you want to batch them up.
But if you can't, you want to leverage some
application specific usage pattern there to try
and cut back on the amount of fetching you're doing.
So one thing you can do is you can cache the
keys that you already know to be unique in memory
in the NS dictionary and check there first.
On the list we see a fair number of
questions about memory management.
So Core Data does the Cocoa technology and all
the standard Cocoa memory management rules apply.
And something to keep particularly in mind is that all of
the objects you fetch from Core Data are all auto released.
So if you don't know what that means, that's a
basic Cocoa term and you'll need to work with that
to create auto release spools to manage the
scope of how long those objects survive.
So if you're doing a lot of fetching in a loop, you might
want to create an auto release spool to go inside that loop
so at the end of every loop iteration you pop the spool
and all the objects you fetched during
that iteration of the loop go away.
Or, on Leopard you can use garbage
collection and not worry about this.
We also have some good questions about the notifications.
As I mentioned we provide a lot of notifications,
both key value observing notifications
and NS notification center notifications.
They are provided at the end of every event.
They're also provided whenever you save a context.
We don't, however, provide any
process notifications for you.
There are a lot of technologies on Mac OS X that already
do this, and you can leverage any of those technologies.
For instance, you can take the notifications we send and
repost them with the NS distributed notification center.
And there are kit keys where you can use to observe
the file descriptor of the database you're working with
and how the other processes notice
whenever that changes on disk.
Stuff like that.
So there are a lot of Mac OS X technologies
to handle cross process notifications.
And we also get a lot of questions about multithreading.
So one of the things is Core Data wants to
use these patterns called thread confinement.
And basically, we want you to keep
your managed objects on one thread.
And if you want to work with them on another thread, we
want you to bring over clones into that other thread
as a separate scratch pad, a separate
working space confined to each thread.
The raw data that we use, that you fetch
from disks is actually going to be shared
between the managed object context by the
coordinator and that shared copy and write.
So pulling these managed objects into separate
threads isn't as expensive as you might fear.
And as I mentioned a couple of times, on
Leopard, we're going to try to find ways
to utilize all those extra cores on your machine on demand.
And then just a quick note, schema version migration,
there's a session at 2 p.m. entirely
devoted to this and to the tools.
Custom atomic stores we're going to talk about
a little bit in the next session after this.
And then dynamic properties and
our integration with Objective-C 2.
and then there's also transformable attributes, so if
any of you have actually played around with Core Data,
there's an attribute type which basically allows
you to attach an NS value transformer to it
and then we just serialize out in NS data, so you can put
in any kind of object you want on the object graph side
and then Core Data will serialize it into a blob for you.
So that way you can set up more custom
classes for your attribute types.
So a summary of some of the things we discussed today.
We went over some of the basics.
Melissa showed you an example of building
a model and normalizing song data.
We showed you some of the examples of
applications on the system that are using Core Data
and some of the things you're using Core Data for,
and an overview of some of the things you can expect
from Core Data and some of the common questions.
So we're going to start Q and A in just
a bit, but some partnering requests
for you is the documentation's
fabulous and there's a lot of it now.
So a few years into Core Data here we have accumulated
a lot of documentation on different features
and performance and a bunch of things like that.
It really helps us out when you file bug reports.
So not just, you're welcome to use the mailing list, but
if you come across a problem or even a performance issue,
if you can go to bugreport.apple.com and let us know.
And we also love stack traces and Shark samples, so if
you have something that you think is a performance issue
and you attach a little Shark sample,
that's really going to help us out.
And a sample application is one of the best
ways to communicate your problem to us.
We click run, we have it in the debugger with
the Core Data source, and we see your problem.
So if you have basically a way to isolate the
bug into a simple app, that would be great.
And we get to those bugs first.
It's true.
So some overview.
There's a Core Data programming guide.
There's a persistent document tutorial.
We haven't gone too much into detail about
some of the integration in the app kit side.
There's a subclass of NS document that
integrates your Core Data for you.
There's a low level Core Data tutorial and
then there's all the reference documentation.
There are a whole bunch of examples on your
system in slash developer slash examples.
And there's some related sessions all here today.
So next up will be optimizing your Core Data application.
Then there's going to be managing your schema
versioning and data migration this afternoon.
Somewhat related, Tuesday, is getting started with
Cocoa bindings that Malcolm's going to be doing.
And our lab, if you want to come in and show us
your application or just ask more questions,
will be tomorrow at 3:30 in the Mac OS X Lab.
Standard who to contact, Matt Formica is the
Track Manager here and the Cocoa Evangelist.